Adventurers

a oI i
_ ve ,
y/ 4 Es
q
Q

Winnifred and Joshua Haldeman

18
Errol, Maye, Elon, Tosca, and Kimbal Musk

19
Cora and Walter Musk

20
Foshua and Winnifred Haldeman

Elon Musk’s attraction to risk was a family trait. In that
regard, he took after his maternal grandfather, Joshua
Haldeman, a daredevil adventurer with strongly held
opinions who was raised on a farm on the barren plains
of central Canada. He studied chiropractic techniques in
Iowa, then returned to his hometown near Moose Jaw,
where he broke in horses and gave chiropractic
adjustments in exchange for food and lodging.

He was eventually able to buy his own farm, but he
lost it during the depression of the 1930s. For the next
few years, he worked as a cowboy, rodeo performer, and
construction hand. His one constant was a love for
adventure. He married and divorced, traveled as a hobo
on freight trains, and was a stowaway on an oceangoing
ship.

The loss of his farm instilled in him a populism, and
he became active in a movement known as the Social
Credit Party, which advocated giving citizens free credit
notes they could use like currency. The movement had a
conservative fundamentalist streak tinged with anti-
Semitism. Its first leader in Canada decried a “perversion
of cultural ideals” because “a disproportionate number of

21
Jews occupy positions of control.” Haldeman rose to
become chair of the party’s national council.

He also enlisted in a movement called Technocracy,
which believed that government should be run by
technocrats rather than politicians. It was temporarily
outlawed in Canada because of its opposition to the
country’s entry into World War II. Haldeman defied the
ban by taking out a newspaper ad supporting the
movement.

At one point he wanted to learn ballroom dancing,
which is how he met Winnifred Fletcher, whose
adventurous streak was equal to his. As a sixteen-year-old,
she got a job at the Moose Jaw Times Herald, but she
dreamed of being a dancer and actress. So she lit out by
train to Chicago and then New York City. Upon her
return, she opened a dance school in Moose Jaw, which is
where Haldeman showed up for lessons. When he asked
her to dinner, she replied, “I don’t date my clients.” So he
quit the class and asked her out again. A few months
later, he asked, “When will you marry me?” She
responded, “Tomorrow.”

They had four children, including twin girls, Maye
and Kaye, born in 1948. One day on a trip he spotted a
For Sale sign on a single-engine Luscombe airplane sitting
in a farmer’s field. He had no cash, but he convinced the

22
farmer to take his car in exchange. It was rather
impetuous, since Haldeman did not know how to fly. He
hired someone to fly him home and teach him how to
pilot the plane.

The family came to be known as The Flying
Haldemans, and he was described by a chiropractic trade
journal as “perhaps the most remarkable figure in the
history of flying chiropractors,” a rather narrow, albeit
accurate, accolade. They bought a larger single-engine
plane, a Bellanca, when Maye and Kaye were three
months old, and the toddlers became known as “the
flying twins.”

With his quirky conservative populist views,
Haldeman came to believe that the Canadian
government was usurping too much control over the
lives of individuals and that the country had gone soft. So
in 1950, he decided to move to South Africa, which was
still ruled by a white apartheid regime. They took apart
the Bellanca, crated it, and boarded a freighter for Cape
Town. Haldeman decided he wanted to live inland, so
they took off toward Johannesburg, where most of the
white citizens spoke English rather than Afrikaans. But as
they flew over nearby Pretoria, the lavender jacaranda
flowers were in bloom, and Haldeman announced, “This
is where we'll stay.”

23
When Joshua and Winnifred were young, a charlatan
named William Hunt, known (at least to himself) as “the
Great Farini,” came to Moose Jaw and told tales of an
ancient “lost city” he had seen when crossing the Kalahari
Desert in South Africa. “This fabulist showed my
grandfather pictures that were obviously fake, but he
became a believer and decided it was his mission to
rediscover it,” Musk says. Once in Africa, the Haldemans
made a monthlong trek into the Kalahari every year to
search for this legendary city. They hunted for their own
food and slept with their guns so they could fend off
lions.

The family adopted a motto: “Live dangerously—
carefully.” They embarked on long-distance flights to
places such as Norway, tied for first place in the twelve-
thousand-mile Cape Town-to-Algiers motor rally, and
became the first to fly a single-engine plane from Africa
to Australia. “They had to remove the back seats to put
in gas tanks,” Maye later recalled.

Joshua Haldeman’s risk-taking eventually caught up
with him. He was killed when a person he was teaching to
fly hit a power line, causing the plane to flip and crash.
His grandson Elon was three at the time. “He knew that
real adventures involve risk,” he says. “Risk energized

”

him.

24
Haldeman imprinted that spirit onto one of his twin
girls, Elon’s mother, Maye. “I know that I can take a risk
as long as ’'m prepared,” she says. As a young student, she
did well in science and math. She was also strikingly
good-looking. Tall and blue-eyed, with high cheekbones
and sculpted chin, she began working at age fifteen as a
model, doing department store runway shows on
Saturday mornings.

Around that time, she met a boy in her neighborhood
who was also strikingly good-looking, albeit in a smooth

and caddish way.

Errol Musk

Errol Musk was an adventurer and wheeler-dealer, always
on the lookout for the next opportunity. His mother,
Cora, was from England, where she finished school at
fourteen, worked at a factory making skins for fighter-
bombers, then took a refugee ship to South Africa. There
she met Walter Musk, a cryptographer and military
intelligence officer who worked in Egypt on schemes to
fool the Germans by deploying fake weapons and
searchlights. After the war, he did little other than sit
silently in an armchair, drink, and use his cryptology skills
on crossword puzzles. So Cora left him, went back to

25
England with their two sons, bought a Buick, and then
returned to Pretoria. “She was the strongest person I ever
met,” Errol says.

Errol earned a degree in engineering and worked on
building hotels, shopping centers, and factories. On the
side, he liked restoring old cars and planes. He also
dabbled in politics, defeating an Afrikaner member of the
pro-apartheid National Party to become one of the few
English-speaking members of the Pretoria City Council.
The Pretoria News for March 9, 1972, reported the
election under the headline “Reaction against the
Establishment.”

Like the Haldemans, he loved flying. He bought a
twin-engine Cessna Golden Eagle, which he used to ferry
television crews to a lodge he had built in the bush. On
one trip in 1986, when he was looking to sell the plane,
he landed at an airstrip in Zambia where a Panamanian-
Italian entrepreneur offered to buy it. They agreed on a
price, and instead of taking a payment in cash, Errol was
given a portion of the emeralds produced at three small
mines that the entrepreneur owned in Zambia.

Zambia then had a postcolonial Black government,
but there was no functioning bureaucracy, so the mine
was not registered. “If you registered it, you would wind
up with nothing, because the Blacks would take

26
everything from you,” Errol says. He criticizes Maye’s
family for being racist, which he insists he is not. “I don’t
have anything against the Blacks, but they are just
different from what I am,” he says in a rambling phone
discourse.

Errol, who never had an ownership stake in the mine,
expanded his trade by importing raw emeralds and
having them cut in Johannesburg. “Many people came to
me with stolen parcels,” he says. “On trips overseas I
would sell emeralds to jewelers. It was a cloak-and-dagger
thing, because none of it was legal.” After producing
profits of roughly $210,000, his emerald business
collapsed in the 1980s when the Russians created an
artificial emerald in the lab. He lost all of his emerald

earnings.

Their marriage

Errol Musk and Maye Haldeman began dating when they
were young teenagers. From the start, their relationship
was filled with drama. He repeatedly proposed to her,
but she didn’t trust him. When she discovered he was
cheating on her, she became so upset that she cried for a
week and couldn’t eat. “Because of grief, I dropped ten
pounds,” she recalls; it helped her win a local beauty

27
contest. She got $150 in cash plus ten tickets to a bowling
alley and became a finalist in the Miss South Africa
contest.

When Maye graduated from college, she moved to
Cape Town to give talks about nutrition. Errol came to
visit, brought an engagement ring, and proposed. He
promised he would change his ways and be faithful once
they were married. Maye had just broken off a
relationship with another unfaithful boyfriend, gained a
lot of weight, and begun to fear that she would never get
married, so she agreed.

The night of the wedding, Errol and Maye took an
inexpensive flight to Europe for their honeymoon. In
France, he bought copies of Playboy, which was banned
in South Africa, and lay on the small hotel bed looking at
them, much to Maye’s annoyance. Their fights turned
bitter. When they got back to Pretoria, she thought of
trying to get out of the marriage. But she soon became
nauseated from morning sickness. She had become
pregnant on the second night of their honeymoon, in the
town of Nice. “It was clear that marrying him had been a
mistake,” she recalls, “but now it was impossible to
undo.”

28
